Lem Tutor
=========
INTRODUCTION

You are reading lem-tutor, an interactive tutorial for the Lem editor.
This is your working copy. Practice commands directly in this buffer.

NOTATION

  C-x      Hold Control, press x
  Alt-x    Hold Alt, press x
  C-x C-c  Hold Control, press x; then hold Control, press c

"C-" means Control. "M-" means Alt.
Lem uses "M-" notation internally - a remnant of the Meta key.
They mean the same thing.

Key sequences like C-x C-c mean: first C-x, then C-c.

CONVENTIONS

Throughout this tutorial, commands are shown in this format:
  key     command-name   Description of what it does

For commands without a key binding, Alt-x takes the place of the key:
  Alt-x   command-name   Description of what it does

NAVIGATION

Two keys that are useful right now:

  C-v   Scroll down one screen
  M-v   Scroll up one screen

----- Quick exercises
>> Press C-v to scroll down.
>> Press M-v to scroll back up here.
-----

COMMANDS

Every action in Lem is a named command. Keys are shortcuts to commands,
but there are many commands that have no key binding at all. You can call any command
by name with Alt-x.

-----
>> Press Alt-x. Press Tab to see available commands. Notice that each
   entry also shows its key binding, if it has one. Press Escape to close.
-----

Escape and C-g both cancel and dismiss pop-ups throughout Lem.
When in doubt, press one or the other.

Lem also has a vi-mode for those who prefer it. To enable it:
  Alt-x vi-mode

REFERENCE

Two commands are useful references throughout this tutorial:
Use these any time you're unsure what a key does or what's available.

  C-x ? describe-key        Describe any key - press the key when prompted.
  Alt-x describe-bindings   List all bindings active in the current buffer.

QUITTING

To leave Lem:
  C-x C-c   exit-lem  Quit the Lem editor.

-----
>> C-x C-c
-----
To return to this tutorial after quitting: Alt-x tutorial.


LESSON 1: MOVEMENT

You have already used two movement commands:

  C-v   Scroll down one screen
  M-v   Scroll up one screen

This lesson covers the rest.

CHARACTER MOVEMENT

  C-f   forward-char     Right arrow also works
  C-b   backward-char    Left arrow also works
  C-n   next-line        Down arrow also works
  C-p   previous-line    Up arrow also works

Arrow keys work, but C-f, C-b, C-n, C-p keep your hands on the home
row and compose with other keys in ways arrows do not. Worth learning.

-----
>> Move through this line character by character with C-f, then back with C-b.
>> Move down a few lines with C-n, then back up with C-p.
-----

LINE MOVEMENT

  C-a   move-to-beginning-of-line  Home also works
  C-e   move-to-end-of-line        End also works

-----
>> Press C-e to jump to the end of this line. Press C-a to return.
-----

WORD MOVEMENT

One character at a time is slow across long lines.
Move by word is available.

  M-f   forward-word   C-Right also works
  M-b   previous-word  C-Left also works

-----
>> Use M-f to move through the words in this sentence, then M-b to return.
-----

PARAGRAPH MOVEMENT

  M-}   forward-paragraph
  M-{   backward-paragraph

Note: { and } require Shift. So M-} is Alt+Shift+] and M-{ is Alt+Shift+[.

Here is the first practice paragraph. It exists so you can feel what
paragraph movement does. The cursor lands on the blank line between
paragraphs.

Here is the second practice paragraph. From here, M-{ jumps back to
the paragraph above. M-} moves forward again.

-----
>> Use M-} and M-{ to move between the two paragraphs above.
-----

BUFFER MOVEMENT

A buffer holds your text in memory. It may or may not be saved to a file -
but for navigation purposes they feel the same.

  M-<   move-to-beginning-of-buffer
  M->   move-to-end-of-buffer

Note: < and > require Shift. So M-< is Alt+Shift+, and M-> is Alt+Shift+.

-----
>> Press M-> to jump to the end of this file. Press M-< to return.
-----

SEARCH

  C-s   isearch-forward
  C-r   isearch-backward

Type to search incrementally - the cursor jumps to the first match
as you type. Press C-s again to move to the next match. Press Escape
or C-g to cancel and return to where you started.

-----
>> Press C-s and type a word from this buffer. Press C-s again to
   find the next occurrence. Press Escape when done.
-----

GOTO LINE

Jump to a specific line number.

  M-g   goto-line

Lem will prompt you for a line number. Type it and press Enter.
Knowing your current line number helps here - see LINE NUMBERS at the
end of this file.

-----
>> Press M-g, enter 1, press Enter. Use M-< or M-> and C-v or M-v
   to orient yourself.
-----

RECENTERING

  C-l   recenter     Recenter the window on the cursor

-----
>> Use C-n to move the cursor near the bottom of the screen without
   scrolling. Then press C-l to recenter the view on the cursor.
-----

SUMMARY

  C-f   forward-char                 Move forward one character
  C-b   backward-char                Move backward one character
  C-n   next-line                    Move to next line
  C-p   previous-line                Move to previous line
  C-a   move-to-beginning-of-line    Move to beginning of line
  C-e   move-to-end-of-line          Move to end of line
  M-f   forward-word                 Move forward one word
  M-b   previous-word                Move backward one word
  M-}   forward-paragraph            Move forward one paragraph
  M-{   backward-paragraph           Move backward one paragraph
  C-v   next-page                    Scroll down one screen
  M-v   previous-page                Scroll up one screen
  C-s   isearch-forward              Search forward
  C-r   isearch-backward             Search backward
  M-<   move-to-beginning-of-buffer  Move to beginning of buffer
  M->   move-to-end-of-buffer        Move to end of buffer
  M-g   goto-line                    Go to line number
  C-l   recenter                     Recenter view on cursor

------------------------------------------------------------------------

LESSON 2: FILES AND CONFIGURATION

In Lem, the text you work with lives in a buffer. A buffer may be
tied to a file on disk, or exist only in memory. When you open a
file, Lem loads it into a buffer. When you save, the buffer contents
are written to that file.

This lesson covers opening and saving files, and introduces the one
file that shapes how Lem behaves at startup: your init file.

OPENING FILES

  C-x C-f   find-file    Open a file

Lem prompts you for a path. You can use tab completion. If the file does not
exist, Lem opens it in the buffer and creates it on disk when you save.

-----
>> Press C-x C-f and open any file on your system. Press Escape to
   cancel if you prefer.
-----

SAVING FILES

  C-x C-s   save-current-buffer  Save the current buffer to its file
  C-x C-w   write-file           Save to a different filename
  C-x s     save-some-buffers    Save all modified buffers (prompts for each)

-----
>> Make a small edit anywhere in this buffer. Press C-x C-s to save it.
-----

The mode line runs along the bottom of the buffer. When a buffer has
unsaved changes, a small indicator appears there. It clears when you save.

YOUR INIT FILE

Lem reads your init file at startup. This is where you configure
keybindings, load extensions, and set preferences. It is a Common
Lisp file evaluated when Lem starts.

Its location is:
  ~/.config/lem/init.lisp

-----
>> Press C-x C-f and open your init file. If it does not exist,
   Lem will create it when you save.
-----

ADDING CONFIGURATION

Each setting is a Lisp form. For example, to enable line numbers at start-up.
Type the expression below in your init.lisp file. Save with C-x C-s.
Then close and re-open Lem.

  (lem/line-numbers:toggle-line-numbers)

Line numbers do not appear in the special buffers like *tmp*, *dashboard* or
*messages*. To see if it worked open a text or code file. Your init.lisp file
itself should now have line-numbers.

In your init file you can write normal Lisp code, including your own commands
with key-bindings.
For example, a command to open your init file quickly:

  (lem:define-command open-init-file () ()
    "Open the Lem init file for editing"
    (lem:find-file
      (merge-pathnames "init.lisp" (lem:lem-home))))

  (define-keys *global-keymap*
    ("M-C-e" 'open-init-file))

Here we've defined a command open-init-file and bound it to a combination of keys.
You can call it with Alt-x open-init-file or press Control+Alt+e.

-----
>> Add both forms to your init file. Save it with C-x C-s.
   Restart Lem. Try Alt-x open-init-file or the keybinding.
-----

You do not need to understand the Lisp syntax fully yet. That comes
later. For now, treat init file forms as configuration entries you
can copy, paste, and modify.

RECENT FILES

Lem keeps track of files you have opened. Press C-x C-h and use tab
completion to pick from the list.

  C-x C-h   find-recent-file  Open a recently visited file

-----
>> Press C-x C-h and reopen the file you just opened.
-----

SUMMARY

  C-x C-f   find-file             Open a file
  C-x C-s   save-current-buffer   Save current buffer
  C-x C-w   write-file            Save to a new filename
  C-x s     save-some-buffers     Save all modified buffers
  C-x C-h   find-recent-file      Open a recent file
------------------------------------------------------------------------

LESSON 3: BUFFERS AND WINDOWS

You opened files in Lesson 2. Each open file lives in a buffer.
Lem can display multiple buffers at once by splitting the screen
into windows. This lesson covers switching between buffers and
arranging windows.

SWITCHING BUFFERS

  C-x b         select-buffer    Switch to a buffer by name
  C-x Left      previous-buffer
  C-x Right     next-buffer
  C-x k         kill-buffer      Close any open buffer, you will get a select window

-----
>> Press C-x Right and C-x Left to cycle through your open buffers.
>> Press C-x b, type a buffer name, press Enter to switch to it.
-----

BUFFER LIST

  C-x C-b   list-buffers  Opens a buffer menu

Shows all open buffers with their file paths. Buffers marked with a
lock icon are read-only. Special buffers like *dashboard* and *tmp*
appear here too - these start and end with * and are not tied to files.

  Space        Mark a buffer
  M-Space      Mark a buffer (cursor moves up)
  C-k          Kill all marked buffers
  Return       Open the buffer at point
  C-g / Esc    Close the list

-----
>> Press C-x C-b. Browse the list, mark a buffer with Space,
   then press Escape.
-----

SPLITTING WINDOWS

A window is a view onto a buffer. Splitting the screen lets you
see two buffers at once.
The command names of the split window commands describe the way the windows stack,
not the orientation of the dividing bar.

  C-x 2   split-active-window-vertically        windows appear above and below each other
  C-x 3   split-active-window-horizontally      windows appear side by side
  C-x 1   delete-other-windows
  C-x 0   delete-active-window
  C-x 4 b select-buffer-next-window

The most useful split for writing code is side by side -- C-x 3 --
keeping a file on the left and a reference or REPL on the right.

-----
>> Press C-x 3 to split the screen side by side.
>> Press C-x C-f to open a file in the new window.
>> Press C-x 1 to return to a single window.
-----

SWITCHING WINDOWS

  C-x o   next-window
  M-o     next-window  faster, one key

-----
>> Split with C-x 3. Use M-o to move between the two windows.
-----

AUTOMATIC SPLITS

Lem splits the window automatically in some situations. When you
start a REPL with Alt-x start-lisp-repl, it opens in a new window.
The debugger does the same when an error occurs. You will see this
in Lesson 6.

For now, know that C-x 1 always gets you back to a single window,
and M-o moves you between whatever windows are open.

OTHER BUFFER COMMANDS

  Alt-x revert-buffer   Reload the file from disk, discarding changes
  Alt-x rename-buffer   Rename the current buffer
  M-~   unmark-buffer   Mark the buffer as unmodified without saving.
                        Useful when you've made exploratory edits you want to discard.

WORKSPACES (FRAME MULTIPLEXER)

Lem supports multiple workspaces - separate window arrangements
within the same Lem instance. Each workspace has its own buffer
layout.

  C-z c   frame-multiplexer-create-with-new-buffer-list  Create a new workspace
  C-z n   frame-multiplexer-next                         Next workspace
  C-z p   frame-multiplexer-prev                         Previous workspace
  C-z d   frame-multiplexer-delete                       Delete current workspace

Useful when you want to keep a separate layout for different tasks -
for example, one workspace for editing, another for the REPL and
debugger.

-----
>> Press C-z c to create a new workspace. Press C-z n and C-z p
   to switch between them. Press C-z d to delete it.
-----

SUMMARY

  C-x b         select-buffer                               Switch to buffer by name
  C-x C-b       list-buffers                                Open the buffer list
  C-x Left      previous-buffer                             Previous buffer
  C-x Right     next-buffer                                 Next buffer
  C-x k         kill-buffer                                 Kill current buffer
  C-x 4 b       select-buffer-next-window                   Select buffer in other window
  M-~           unmark-buffer                               Clear the modified marker
  C-x 2         split-active-window-vertically              Windows appear above and below
  C-x 3         split-active-window-horizontally            Windows appear side by side
  C-x 1         delete-other-windows                        Close other windows
  C-x 0         delete-active-window                        Close current window
  C-x o         next-window                                 Switch to next window
  M-o           next-window                                 Switch to next window
  C-z c         frame-multiplexer-create-with-new-buffer-list   Create new workspace
  C-z n         frame-multiplexer-next                      Next workspace
  C-z p         frame-multiplexer-prev                      Previous workspace
  C-z d         frame-multiplexer-delete                    Delete current workspace

  Alt-x revert-buffer   Reload buffer from disk
  Alt-x rename-buffer   Rename the current buffer

  In buffer list (C-x C-b):
  Space         Mark buffer
  M-Space       Mark buffer (cursor up)
  C-k           Kill marked buffers
  Return        Open buffer at point

------------------------------------------------------------------------

LESSON 4: EDITING

Lessons 1 through 3 covered moving around and managing files, buffers,
and windows. This lesson covers changing text — selecting, cutting,
copying, pasting, undoing, and cleaning up whitespace.

REGION

A region is a selection of text between the mark and the cursor.
Set the mark with C-Space, then move the cursor — the region is
everything between them.

  C-Space   mark-set                 Set the mark here
  C-x h     mark-set-whole-buffer    Select the entire buffer

Shift+arrow keys also set the mark and move simultaneously, like
selection in most editors.

-----
>> Press C-Space at the start of the practice line below.
   Move with C-f or C-n to select some text. The region highlights
   as you move. Press C-g to cancel the selection.

The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.
-----

KILL AND YANK

In Lem, "kill" means cut and "yank" means paste. Killed text goes
onto the kill ring — a clipboard that remembers multiple entries.

  C-k     kill-line       Kill from cursor to end of line
  C-w     kill-region     Kill the active region
  M-w     copy-region     Copy the region without killing it
  C-y     yank            Paste the most recently killed text
  M-y     yank-pop        Cycle through earlier kill ring entries

C-k on an empty line kills the newline itself. Press it twice on a
normal line to kill the line and its newline together.

-----
>> Move to the kill line below. Press C-k to kill it.
   Move down a few lines. Press C-y to yank it back.
>> Press C-Space, select a word, then M-w to copy it.
   Move elsewhere and C-y to paste.
>> Press C-y again, then M-y to cycle to an earlier kill.

Kill this:  one   two   three   four   five
-----

UNDO AND REDO

  C-\   undo
  C-/   redo
  C-_   redo

Undo walks back through every change. Redo walks forward again.

-----
>> Make a few edits on the line below. Press C-\ repeatedly to undo
   them one by one. Press C-/ to redo.

Undo test: delete or change the words on this line, then undo.
-----

WHITESPACE

  M-Space  just-one-space      Collapse surrounding whitespace to one space
  M-^      delete-indentation  Join current line to the line above

  Alt-x delete-trailing-whitespace   Remove trailing whitespace from the buffer
  Alt-x format-current-buffer        Reformat the whole buffer according to its mode rules

-----
>> Put the cursor between two words in the whitespace line below.
   Press M-Space to collapse the spaces to one.
>> Move to the indented line and press M-^ to join it to the line above.

Whitespace test: collapse    these    extra    spaces    to    one.
Joining test: 
	this line should join to the one above it.
-----

COMMENTS

Lem can toggle comments on a selected region using the comment
syntax of the current mode.

  Alt-x comment-or-uncomment-region

This command is mode-aware — it uses the correct comment syntax for
the language you are editing. It has no effect in plain text buffers.
See Lesson 6 for a practical exercise in a Lisp buffer.

SEARCH AND REPLACE

  M-%   query-replace

Lem prompts for a search string, then a replacement. For each match
it asks what to do:

  y   replace this match and move to the next
  n   skip this match
  !   replace all remaining matches without asking
  q   stop replacing
  C-g exit query-replace

Query-replace searches forward from your current cursor or point position.
Use M-< first to start from the beginning of buffer.

-----
>> Press M-% and replace "cat" with "dog" in the line below.
   Try y to replace one at a time, or ! to replace all at once.
   Press q or Escape when done.

Replace test: cat cat cat cat cat
-----

SUMMARY

  C-Space   mark-set                Set the mark
  C-x h     mark-set-whole-buffer   Select the whole buffer
  C-k       kill-line               Kill line
  C-w       kill-region             Kill region
  M-w       copy-region             Copy region
  C-y       yank                    Yank
  M-y       yank-pop                Cycle kill ring
  C-\       undo                    Undo
  C-/       redo                    Redo
  M-Space   just-one-space          Collapse whitespace around cursor to one space
  M-^       delete-indentation      Join line to line above
  M-%       query-replace           Query-replace

  Alt-x delete-trailing-whitespace     Remove trailing whitespace from the buffer
  Alt-x comment-or-uncomment-region    Toggle comments on region
  Alt-x format-current-buffer          Reformat the buffer according to its mode rules

------------------------------------------------------------------------

APPENDIX

This section covers useful features that don't belong to a single
lesson. Return here any time.

LINE NUMBERS

Lem can display line numbers in the left margin.

-----
>> Alt-x toggle-line-numbers
   Press it again to turn them off.
-----

This toggles line numbers on and off for the current buffer. Useful
when navigating with M-g or orienting yourself in a long file.

For relative line numbers - showing the distance from the cursor rather
than the absolute line number - add this to your init file:

  (setf lem/line-numbers:*relative-line* t)

Relative line numbers are useful when jumping by a known number of
lines. The current line always shows its absolute number.
